
========
Overview
========

This package is not a DB abstraction layer even though it may look similar (and draw some inspiration from projects
like `Doctrine/DBAL <https://www.doctrine-project.org/projects/dbal.html>`__,
`laminas-db <https://docs.laminas.dev/laminas-db/>`__, and `PEAR::MDB2 <https://pear.php.net/package/MDB2>`__).
Its goal is to leverage PostgreSQL's strengths in PHP projects rather than assist with building
RDBMS-agnostic applications.

One of such strengths is a `rich and extensible data type
system <https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/datatype.html>`__,
so pg_wrapper allows to

- Easily build string representations for query parameters,
- Automatically convert query result columns from string representations to native PHP types,
- Use provided classes to represent PostgreSQL's complex types (geometric, ranges, etc.)
  that do not have native PHP equivalents,
- Add custom converters for custom and ad-hoc types.

It is possible to use only the converters from this package with some DBAL, but using the complete package has benefits:

- :ref:`Optimized handling of type metadata <internals-oids-explanation>`;
- Postgres-specific API, e.g. ``executeParams()`` and prepared statements introspection.

Requirements
============

pg_wrapper requires at least PHP 8.2 with `ctype <https://www.php.net/manual/en/book.ctype.php>`__ and
`json <https://www.php.net/manual/en/book.json.php>`__ extensions (those are usually installed and enabled by default).

Native `pgsql <https://php.net/manual/en/book.pgsql.php>`__ extension (*not* PDO_pgsql) should be enabled
to use classes that access the DB, the extension is not a hard requirement.

Minimum supported PostgreSQL version is 12.

It is highly recommended to use `PSR-6 <https://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-6/>`__ compatible metadata cache in production
to prevent possible metadata lookups from database on each page request.

Installation
============

Require the package with `composer <https://getcomposer.org/>`__:

.. code-block:: bash

    composer require "sad_spirit/pg_wrapper:^3"


Related packages
================

`sad_spirit/pg_builder <https://github.com/sad-spirit/pg-builder>`__
  A query builder for Postgres that contains
  a partial reimplementation of SQL parser used in Postgres itself. It can extract types info from SQL typecasts and
  propagate that to pg_wrapper when executing built queries.

`sad_spirit/pg_gateway <https://github.com/sad-spirit/pg-gateway>`__
  Builds upon pg_wrapper and pg_builder to provide
  `Table Data Gateway <https://martinfowler.com/eaaCatalog/tableDataGateway.html>`__ implementation
  for Postgres that

  - Uses table metadata to generate queries and to automatically convert PHP variables used for query parameters;
  - Accepts SQL strings for parts of the query generated by a gateway;
  - Allows combining queries generated by several gateways using ``WITH`` / ``JOIN`` / ``EXISTS()``.
